Exercise 5
================

# Wisdom and Madness of the Crowd

Demo: <https://ncase.me/crowds/>

## 1. What is complex contagion and how it’s different from simple contagion?

In the case of this experiment, we can define contagion as how people
pass beliefs and behavior in society. People influence their friends but
also their friends’ friends with ideas, habits, behavior, etc.

Simple contagion is the spreading process induced by a single exposure
to a contagious entity while complex contagion often time requires
multiple exposures for transmission but not too many either because it
can slow down the contagion.

## 2. What does complex contagion mean for diffusion of behaviors in organization?

With simple ideas, no matter the number of connections ideas can spread
easily from one end to the other end of the network. However, with
complex ideas more connections hinder the spread of complex ideas
because they get crushed by group think.

Group-think is when a group is too tightly knit and often time members
of the group are at the top of the organizational chart. The members
tend to resist the adoption of new, complex ideas that challenge their
beliefs or egos. Group-think can easily lead to crowd madness.

This is why it is important to create the perfect balance between
bonding social capital and bridging social capital.

-   Bonding social capital is the number of connections in a group. With
    too few connections, an idea spreads with difficulty and with too
    many you get group-think.
-   Bridging social capital is the number of connections between groups.
    It’s good to have groups break out of their insulated space and
    reach out to other diverse groups.

There’s a sweet spot for both bonding and bridging social capital, not
too few not to many. And this is where the concept of Small World
Network comes into play.

A Small World Networks has a perfect mix of bonding within and bridging
between groups. It fosters creativity, problem solving while avoiding
group-think and narrow mindedness.

## 3. How can we use the threshold models?

The threshold models introduced in the demo reinforce the idea that
organizations need the perfect mix of bonding and bridging social
capital. If individuals are not connected enough the good idea (or
behavior or habit) cannot spread as individuals are not encouraged by
social pressure to join the movement. On the other hand if there are too
many connections the idea is nipped in the bud before the contagion can
spread to the whole network.

The point is that individuals need to be well connected within their
network and the networks need to be interconnected for an effective
spread of the positive change. Organizations can use this information to
encourage social behavior. Indeed, individuals who are well connected
within the organization have higher chances to learn new skills, develop
productive habits and have a positive social impact on the organization
as well.
